Every year, China imports about 66,000
metric tons of these. That's the weight
of about 6 and a half Parisian
landmarks, or if you like, 440 blue
whales.
And most of these avocados come all the
way from Peru. This journey used to take
over a month. Now, it's a straight shot,
cutting it by 10 days. Why? One word,
megaport.
And it's paid for by China.
The Chinese President Xi Jinping begins
a week-long South America tour, opening
a China funded mega port in Peru.
>> This is a huge investment, not only for
Peru, but in Latin America, and it is
expected to triple agricultural exports
of Peru. Over the last 20 years, China
has built up a network of about a 100
ports on every continent except
Antarctica,
clustered around key maritime choke
points, which are crucial to global
trade.
>> This gives China a strategic advantage
as global trade tensions rise,
but it's also sparking concerns. Even
though these ports by and large are
commercial ports, some of them do
actually have the capacity to host naval
vessels. So why did China build a global
ports empire? And should Washington be
worried about it?
Without ports, the global economy pretty
much grinds to a halt.
Roughly about 80% of global trade is
conducted via ships and ports are
crucial to that.
>> Six of the 10 BCS ports in the world are
located in China and 95% of the nation's
trade is done by sea.
>> China has made itself rich by being able
to find markets overseas for its
manufactured goods and being able to
ship raw materials to China to be
processed. So making sure that it has
access to a network of global ports is a
key part of that.
>> And it's not only ports. China is also
the world's biggest maker of container
ships. Making these generational
investments to dominate global trade
infrastructure is a central pillar of
the belt and road initiative. Over the
years, it has become President
Xiinping's signature global initiative
with the goal to strengthen or improve
global connectivity through building up
infrastructure projects. This has meant
modernizing the ancient Silk Road with
highways and rail while securing
maritime pathways in and out of China.
Since the launch of the belt and road
initiative, Chinese entities investment
in overseas ports have accelerated both
in terms of scale and numbers. This map
shows Chinese entities have invested in
$129 port projects totaling over $60
billion from Tanzania and Australia to
Nigeria and Cambodia.
This dwarfs investments made by any
other country. There is no US government
initiative that tries to finance or
build port projects overseas.
>> China has an entire ecosystem of
companies from cement firms, iron steel
firms that specialize in building out
ports. Those are not industries where
the US has been focused in recent years.
>> But the level of Chinese ownership over
its ports varies. China's global pot
network is made up of a series of
different forms of ownership by Chinese
state-run companies and also Chinese
private companies.
>> In most cases, they team up with
multinational or local companies to
build and run the ports. Even though the
land is still owned by local
governments,
17 of the ports China has invested in
have majority Chinese ownership, which
could offer Beijing more leverage at
those sites, such as prioritizing
container ships from a certain country
or denying the docking of ships from
other countries. But China has little
reason to disrupt global trade, which
takes us back to the first mega port we
mentioned at Chiankai in Peru. 60% is
owned by China's state-run shipping
company, Costco, and 40% by an entity
controlled by an Argentine investor.
Chankai is located around 40 mi north of
Lima. And in its final phase, the main
area of the port is expected to be
around 700 acres, which is about 80% the
size of Central Park. So the port itself
is huge. This port is part of China's
large infrastructure push in Latin
America. Currently, three out of four of
the biggest economies of South America
trade more with China than the US. In
fact, a third of all the containers
exported by Peru are sent to China,
carrying not only these favorites, but
other agricultural products and minerals
as well.
So, this makes Peru a crucial gateway
into China for Brazil, Chile, and other
countries.
The initial investment was of $1.3
billion. But if there is more demand,
Costco has said that it could invest
$3.5 billion total for an expansion of
the port.
>> Chiankai is a deep water port, which
means that shipments could take place
directly from Chiang Kai to major
Chinese ports. So that would enable
journeys to be cut down, costs to be
reduced, trade to be increased between
South America and China.
US officials have criticized this port,
telling Peruvian authorities that they
should not have allowed a Chinese firm
to create such a big investment in the
region. But Peruvian officials have
countered, saying that the US hasn't
been willing to make such a big
investment in Peru.
>> As we know by now, this is not just a
story about overseas investment. It's
also about national security. A number
of Trump officials have even suggested
that the port could be dual use, meaning
that at some stage it could be used not
just for economic activity, but for
military activity, too. That's something
that Heruvian officials strongly deny
and that China denies, too.
>> But these concerns are not unfounded.
>> US intelligence says China's first
overseas military base in the tiny
African country of Djibouti is likely to
be followed by several more. in
Djibouti. What began as a commercial
port eventually turned into China's
first full-fledged overseas military
base.
Remember this map? Of the 17 ports with
Chinese majority ownership, 14 have
potential for both commercial and
military use. Meaning it can service
commercial ships, LG tankers, oil
tankers and it might also has the
physical capacity to host fueling ships,
logistic ships for military purposes or
a military battleship.
>> China only has one overseas naval base
so far as compared to the several that
the US has dotted around the world. In
fact, the US also has a naval base in
Djibouti along with at least 127 other
overseas military bases. Chinese
officials strongly deny that the ports
are for military use. But still,
>> many countries around the world are
concerned that these Chinese port
operators could in turn become listening
posts to what the economies that are
surrounding these ports are doing.
But the more immediate concern is that
China could leverage these ports in a
trade war.
>> China is operating the Panama Canal, and
we didn't give it to China. We gave it
to Panama, and we're taking it back.
>> For the US, the Panama Canal is really a
crucial economic lifeline. something
like 5% of global trade travels through
the canal and 40% of US container
traffic flows through it. Without that
ability to easily pass between the
Atlantic and the Pacific oceans through
that corridor, US trade would be very
much impacted.
>> Two of the ports on either side of the
canal are owned by Hong Kong based
conglomerate SK Hutchinson.
>> To all intents and purposes, Beijing
doesn't have direct control over
Hutchinson. But the very fact that the
key executives at these companies may
have direct relationship with the
Chinese Communist Party, that really
makes a lot of Western governments
uncomfortable.
A foreign power today possesses through
their companies, which we know are not
independent, the ability to turn the
canal into a choke point, and that is a
direct threat to the national interest
and security of the United States.
China has said that it has always
respected Panama's sovereignty over the
canal and that it firmly opposes
economic coercion and bullying
practices. Yet, it has also pushed back
against a deal that would give control
of CK Hutchinson's Panama ports to
American asset manager Black Rockck,
calling the deal a betrayal of national
interests.
The European Union has introduced
investment screening regulations which
make it much more difficult for China to
buy up critical infrastructure including
ports across the continent. A tit fortat
over docking fees has also been rippling
through the shipping industry.
Washington has also suggested that all
this Chinese money comes with heavy
strings attached.
But if you talk to officials in Nigeria,
Peru, beyond, there's a feeling that
look, we need this infrastructure. It's
important for our economic modernization
plans, and China is the only game in
town offering it.
>> Ultimately, we're going to see a
reshaping of global trade flows because
maritime trade has become more and more
political.
[Music]